<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-24" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Cahawba</i>⁠—Her arrival⁠—Last night in Havana⁠—Leave-takings⁠—On board the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Cahawba</i>⁠—Getting underway⁠—Last views of Cuba⁠—Night at sea.</p>
			</header>
			<p>All day there have been earnest looks to the northwest, for the smoke of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Cahawba</i>. We are willing and desirous to depart. Our sights are seen, our business done, and our trunks packed. While we are sitting round our table after dinner, George, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Miller’s servant, comes in, with a bright countenance, and says “There is a steamer off.” We go to the roof, and there, far in the <abbr epub:type="se:compass">N.W.</abbr>, is a small but unmistakable cloud of steamer’s smoke, just in the course the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Cahawba</i> would take. “Let us walk down to the Punta, and see her come in.” It is between four and five o’clock, and a pleasant afternoon, (there has been no rain or sign of rain in Cuba since we first saw it⁠—twelve days ago), and we saunter along, keeping in the shade, and sit down on the boards at the wharf, in front of the Presidio, near to where politicians are garroted, and watch the progress of the steamer, amusing ourselves at the same time with seeing the Negroes swimming and washing horses in the shallow water off the bank. A Yankee flag flies from the signal-post of the Morro, but the Punta keeps the steamer from our sight. It draws towards six o’clock, and no vessel can enter after dark. We begin to fear she will not reach the point in season. Her cloud of smoke rises over the Punta, the city clocks strike six, the Morro strikes six, the trumpets bray out, the sun is down, the signals on the Morro are lowering⁠—“She’ll miss it!”⁠—“No⁠—there she is!”⁠—and, round the Punta comes her sharp black head, and then her full body, her toiling engine and smoking chimney and peopled decks, and flying stars and stripes⁠—Good luck to her! and, though the signal is down, she pushes on and passes the forts without objection, and is lost among the shipping.</p>
			<p>My companions are so enthusiastic that they go on board; but I return to my hotel and take a volante, and make my last calls, and take my last looks, and am ready to leave in the morning. In half an hour, the arrival of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Cahawba</i> is known over all Havana, and the news of the loss of her consort, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Black Warrior</i>, in a fog off New York⁠—passengers and crew and specie safe. My companions come back. They met <abbr>Capt.</abbr> Bullock on the pier, and took tea with him in La Dominica. He sails at two o’clock tomorrow.</p>
			<p><i>Wednesday, March 2, 1859</i>.⁠—I shall not see them again, but there they will be, day after day, day after day⁠—how long?⁠—aye, how long?⁠—the squalid, degraded chain gang! The horrible prison!⁠—profaning one of the grandest of sites, where city, sea and shore unite as almost nowhere else on earth! These were my thoughts as, in the pink and gray dawn, I walked down the Paseo, to enjoy my last refreshing in the rock-hewn sea baths.</p>
			<p>This leave-taking is a strange process, and has strange effects. How suddenly a little of unnoticed good in what you leave behind comes out, and touches you, in a moment of tenderness! And how much of the evil and disagreeable seems to have disappeared! Le Grand, after all, is no more inattentive and intractable than many others would become in his place; and he does keep a good table, and those breakfasts are very pretty. Antonio is no hydropathist, to be sure, and his ear distinguishes the voices that pay best; yet one pities him in his routine, and in the fear he is under, being a native of Old Spain, that his name will turn up in the conscription, when he will have to shoulder his musket for five years in the Cabaña and Punta. Nor can he get off the island, for the permit will be refused him, poor fellow!</p>
			<p>One or two of our friends are to remain here, for they have pulmonary difficulties, and prefer to avoid the North in March. They look a little sad at being left alone, and talk of going into the country to escape the increasing heat. A New York gentleman has taken a great fancy to the volantes, and thinks that a costly one, with two horses, and silvered postilion in boots and spurs and bright jacket could eclipse any equipage in the Fifth Avenue.</p>
			<p>When you come to leave, you find that the strange and picturesque character of the city has interested you more than you think; and you stare out of your carriage to read the familiar signs, the names of streets, the Obra Pia, Lamparilla, Mercaderes, San Ignacio, Obispo, O’Reilly, and Officios, and the pretty and fantastic names of the shops. You think even the narrow streets have their advantages, as they are better shaded, and the awnings can stretch across them, though, to be sure, they keep out the air. No city has finer avenues than the Isabel and the Tacon; and the palm trees, at least, we shall not see at the North. Here is La Dominica. It is a pleasant place, in the evening, after the <i xml:lang="es">Retreta</i>, to take your tea or coffee under the trees by the fountain in the courtyard, and meet the Americans and English;⁠—the only public place, except the theatre, where ladies are to be seen out of their volantes. Still, we are quite ready to go; for we have seen all we have been told to see in Havana, and it is excessively hot, and growing hotter.</p>
			<p>But no one can leave Cuba without a permit. When you arrive, the visé of your passport is not enough, but you must pay a fee for a permit to land and remain in the island; and when you wish to return, you must pay four dollars to get back your passport, with a permit to leave. The customhouse officials were not troublesome in respect to our luggage, hardly examining it at all, and, I must admit, showed no signs of expecting private fees. Along the range of piers, where the bows of the vessels run in, and on which the labor of this great commerce is performed, there runs a high, wide roof, covering all from the intense rays of the sun. Before this was put up, they say that workmen used to fall dead with sun strokes, on the wharves.</p>
			<p>On board the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Cahawba</i>, I find my barrel of oranges from Iglesia, and box of sweet meats from La Dominica, and boxes of cigars from Cabaña’s, punctually delivered. There once more, is Bullock, cheerful, and efficient. Rodgers, full of kindness and good humor and sturdy, trustworthy Miller, and Porter the kindly and spirited; and the pleased face of Henry, the captain’s steward; and the familiar faces of the other stewards; and my friend’s son, who is well and very glad to see me, and full of New Orleans, and of last night, which he spent on shore in Havana. All are in good spirits, for a short sea voyage with old friends is before us; and then⁠—home!</p>
			<p>The decks are loaded and piled up with oranges:⁠—oranges in barrels and oranges in crates, filling all the wings and gangways, the barrels cut to let in air, and the crates with bars just close enough to keep in the oranges. The delays from want of lighters, and the great amount of freight, keep us through the day; and it is nearly sundown before we get underway. All day the fruit boats are alongside, and passengers and crew lay in stocks of oranges and bananas and sapotes, and little boxes of sweetmeats. At length, the last barrel is on board, the permits and passenger lists are examined, the revenue officers leave us, and we begin to heave up our anchor.</p>
			<p>The harbor is very full of vessels, and the room for swinging is small. A British mail steamer, and a Spanish man-of-war, and several merchantmen, are close upon us. Captain Bullock takes his second mate aft and they have a conference, as quietly as if they were arranging a funeral. He is explaining to him his plan for running the warps and swinging the ship, and telling him beforehand what he is to do in this case, and what in that, and how to understand his signs, so that no orders, or as few as possible, need be given at the time of action. The engine moves, the warp is hauled upon, the anchor tripped, and dropped again, and tripped again, the ship takes the right sheer, clear of everything, and goes handsomely out of the harbor, the star and stripes at her peak, with a waving of hats from friends on the Punta wharf. The western sky is gorgeous with the setting sun, and the evening drums and trumpets sound from the encircling fortifications, as we pass the Casa Blanca, the Cabaña, the Punta, and the Morro. The sky fades, the ship rises and falls in the heave of the sea, the lantern of the Morro gleams over the water, and the dim shores of Cuba are hidden from our sight.</p>
			<p>After tea, all are on deck. It is a clear night, and no night or day has been else thar clear at sea or on shore, since we first crossed the Gulf Stream, on our passage out. The Southern Cross is visible in the south, and the North Star is above the horizon in the north. No winter climate of Cuba, in mountain or on plain⁠—the climate of no land, can be compared with the ocean⁠—the clear, bracing, saline air of ocean! How one drinks it in! And, then, again, the rocking cradle that nurses one in sleep! Nothing but the necessity of sleep⁠—the ultimate necessity of self preservation, can close one’s eyes upon such a night as this, in the equinoctial seas.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
