<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XIX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-19" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Drive over the Paseo de Tacon⁠—Count de la Fernandina⁠—Cuban nobility⁠—Hospital of San Juan de Dios⁠—The Presidio and grand prison; its inmates, discipline, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
			</header>
			<p>Drove out over the Paseo de Tacon to the Cerro, a height, formerly a village, now a part of the suburbs of Havana. It is high ground, and commands a noble view of Havana and the sea. Coming in, I met the Bishop, who introduced me to the Count de La Fernandina, a dignified Spanish nobleman, who owns a beautiful villa on this Paseo, where we walked a while in the grounds. This house is very elegant and costly, with marble floors, high ceilings, piazzas, and a garden of the richest trees and flowers coming into the courtyard, and advancing even into the windows of the house. It is one of the most beautiful villas in the vicinity of Havana.</p>
			<p>There are several noblemen who have their estates and titles in Cuba, but are recognized as nobles of Spain;⁠—in all, I should say, about fifty or sixty. Some of these have received their titles for civil or military services; but most of them have been raised to their rank on account of their wealth, or have purchased their titles outright. I believe there are but two grades, the marquis and the count. Among the titles best known to strangers are Villanueva, Fernandina, and O’Reilly. The number of Irish families who have taken rank in the Spanish service and become connected with Cuba, is rather remarkable. Beside O’Reilly, there are O’Don nel, O’Farrel, and O’Lawlor, descendants of Irishmen who entered the Spanish service after the battle of the Boyne.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Howe had seen the Presidio, the great prison of Havana, once; but was desirous to visit it again; so he joined me, under the conduct of our young friend, Señor ⸻, to visit that and the hospital of San Juan de Dios. The hospital we saw first. It is supported by the government⁠—that is to say, by Cuban revenues⁠—for charity patients chiefly, but some, who can afford it, pay more or less. There are about two hundred and fifty patients. This, again, is in the charge of the Sisters of Charity. As we came upon one of the Sisters, in a passageway, in her white cap and cape, and black and blue dress, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Howe said, “I always take off my hat to a Sister of Charity,” and we paid them all that attention, whenever we passed them. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Howe examined the book of prescriptions, and said that there was less drugging than he supposed there would be. The attending physician told us that nearly all the physicians had studied in Paris, or in Philadelphia. There were a great many medical students in attendance, and there had just been an operation in the theatre. In an open yard we saw two men washing a dead body, and carelessly laying it on a table, for dissection. I am told that the medical and surgical professions are in a very satisfactory state of advancement in the island, and that a degree in medicine, and a license to practise, carry with them proofs of considerable proficiency. It is always observable that the physical and the exact sciences are the last to suffer under despotisms.</p>
			<p>The Presidio and Grand Cárcel of Havana is a large building, of yellow stone, standing near the fort of the Punta, and is one of the striking objects as you enter the harbor. It has no appearance of a jail without, but rather of a palace or court; but within, it is full of live men’s bones and of all uncleanness. No man, whose notions are derived from an American or English penitentiary of the last twenty years, or fifty years, can form an idea of the great Cuban prison. It is simply horrible. There are no cells, except for solitary confinement of “<span xml:lang="es">incomunicados</span>,”⁠—who are usually political offenders. The prisoners are placed in large rooms, with stone floors and grated windows, where they are left, from twenty to fifty in each, without work, without books, without interference or intervention of anyone, day and night, day and night, for the weeks, months or years of their sentences. The sights are dreadful. In this hot climate, so many beings, with no provision for ventilation but the grated windows⁠—so unclean, and most of them naked above the waist⁠—all spend their time in walking, talking, playing, and smoking; and, at night, without bed or blanket, they lie down on the stone floor, on what clothes they may have, to sleep if they can. The whole prison, with the exception of the few cells for the “<span xml:lang="es">incomunicados</span>,” was a series of these great cages, in which human beings were shut up. Incarceration is the beginning, middle and end of the whole system. Reformation, improvement, benefit to soul or body, are not thought of. We inquired carefully, both of the officer who was sent to attend us, and of a <i xml:lang="es">capitan de partido</i>, who was there, and were positively assured that the only distinction among the prisoners was determined by the money they paid. Those who can pay nothing, are left to the worst. Those who can pay two reals (twenty-five cents) a day, are placed in wards a little higher and better. Those who can pay six reals (seventy-five cents) a day, have better places still, called the “<span xml:lang="es">Salas de distincion</span>,” and some privileges of walking in the galleries. The amount of money, and not the degree of criminality, determines the character of the punishment. There seems to be no limit to the right of the prisoners to talk with any whom they can get to hear them, at whatever distance, and to converse with visitors, and to receive money from them. In fact, the whole scene was a Babel. All that was insured was that they should not escape. When I say that no work was done, I should make the qualification that a few prisoners were employed in rolling tobacco into cigars, for a contractor; but they were very few. Among the prisoners was a <i xml:lang="es">capitan de partido</i> (a local magistrate), who was committed on a charge of conniving at the slave trade. He could pay his six reals, of course; and had the privileges of a “<span xml:lang="es">Sala de distincion</span>” and of the galleries. He walked about with us, cigar in mouth, and talked freely, and gave us much information respecting the prison. My last request was to see the <i xml:lang="es">garrotte</i>; but it was refused me.</p>
			<p>It was beginning to grow dark before we got to the gate, which was duly opened to us, and we passed out, with a good will, into the open air. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Howe said he was nowise reluctant to be outside. It seemed to bring back to his mind his Prussian prison, a little too forcibly to be agreeable. He felt as if he were in keeping again, and was thinking how he should feel if, just as we got to the gate, an officer were to bow and say, “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Howe?” “Yes, sir.” “You may remain here. There is a charge against you of seditious language, since you have been in the island.” No man would meet such a danger more calmly, and say less about it, than he, if he thought duty to his fellow beings called him to it.</p>
			<p>The open air, the chainless ocean, and the ships freely coming and going, were a pleasant change to the eye, even of one who had never suffered bonds for conscience’ sake. It seemed strange to see that all persons outside were doing as they pleased.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
