<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-14" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Life of a planter and his family⁠—Coffee estate of <abbr>St.</abbr> Catalina⁠—Afternoon ride⁠—Departure from La Ariadne⁠—Return to Matanzas.</p>
			</header>
			<p>If the master of a plantation is faithful and thorough, will tolerate no misconduct or imposition, and yet is humane and watchful over the interests and rights, as well as over the duties of the negroes, he has a hard and anxious life. Sickness to be ministered to , the feigning of sickness to be counteracted, rights of the slaves to be secured against other negroes, as well as against whites, with a poor chance of getting at the truth from either ; the obligations of the negro quasi marriage to be enforced against all the sen sual and childish tendencies of the race . theft and violence and wanderings from home to be detected and prevented ; the work to be done, and yet no one to be overworked ; and all this often with no effectual aid, often with only obstructions, from the intermediate whites ! Nor is it his own people only that are to be looked to . The thieving and vio lence of n groes from other plantations, their visits by night against law, and the encroach ments of the neighboring free blacks and low whites, are all to be watched and prevented or punished. The master is a policeman , as well as an economist and a judge. His revolver and rifle are always loaded. He has his dogs, his trackers and seizers , that lie at his gate, trained to give the alarm when a strange step comes near the house or the quarters, and ready to pursue His hedges may be broken down , his cane trampled or cut, or, still worse, set fire to, goats let into his pas tures, his poultry stolen , and sometimes his dogs poisoned. It is a country of little law and order, and what with slavery and free negroes and low whites, violence or fraud are imminent and always formidable. No man rides far unarmed. The negroes are held un der the subjection of force. A quarter-deck organization is established. The master owns vessel and cargo, and is captain of the ship and he and his family live in the cabin and hold the quarter-deck. There are no other commissioned officers on board, and no guard of marines. There are a few pe ty officers, and under all, a great crew of negroes, for every kind of work, held by compulsion ,-the results of a press-gang. All are at sea to gether. There are some laws , and civil author ities for the protection of each, but not very near, nor always accessible.</p>
			<p>After dinner to -day, we take saddle-horses for a ride to Santa Catalina. Necessary duties in the field and mill delay us, and we are in danger of not being able to visit the house, as my friend must be back in season for the close of work and the distribution of provisions , in the absence of his mayoral. The horses have the famous ” march,” as it is called, of the island, an easy rapid step , something like pacing, and delightful for a quiet ride under a soft afternoon sky, among flowers and sweet odors. I have seen but few trotting horses ir. Cuba.</p>
			<p>The afternoon is serene. Near, the birds are flying, or chattering with extreme sociability ir close trees, and the thickets are fragrant with flowers ; while far off, the high hills loom in the horizon ; and all about us is this tropical growth, with which I cannot yet become familiar, of palms and cocoas and bananas. We amble over the red earth of the winding lanes, and turn into the broad avenue of Santa Catalina, with its double row of royal palms. We are in- not a forest, for the trees are not thick and wild and large enough for that but in a huge, dense, tropical orchard. The avenue is as clear and straight and wide as a city mall ; while all the ground on either side, for hundreds of acres , is a plan tation of oranges and limes, bananas and plantains, cocoas and pine-apples, and of cedar and mango, mignonette and allspice, under whose shade is growing the green-leaved , the evergreen-leaved coffee plant, with its little dark red berry, the tonic of half the world. Here we have a glimpse of the lost charm of Cuba. No wonder that the aged proprietor cannot find the heart to lay it waste for the monotonous cane-field, and make the quiet, peaceful horticulture , the natural growth of fruit and berry, and the simple processes of gathering, drying, and storing, give place to the steam and sinoke and drive and life consuming toil of the ingenio !</p>
			<p>At a turn in the avenue, we come upon the proprietor, who is taking his evening walk, still in the exact dress and with the exact manners of urban life. With truly French politeness, he is distressed, and all but of fended , that we cannot go to his house. It is my duty to insist on declining his invita tion, for I know that C⁠⸺ is anxious to return. At another turn , we come upon a group of little black children , under the charge of a decent, matronly mulatto, com ing up a shaded footpath, which leads among the coffee. C⁠⸺ stops to give a kind word to them.</p>
			<p>But it is sunset, and we must turn about We ride rather rapidly down the avenue, and along the highway, where we meet several travellers, nearly all with pistols in their hol sters, and one of the mounted police, with car bine and sword ; and then cross the brook pass through the little, mean hamlet of Li monar, whose inmates are about half blacks and half whites, but once a famed resort for invalids, and enter our own avenue, and thence to the house. On our way, we pass a burying-ground, which my companion says he is ashamed to have me see. Its condi tion is bad enough. The planters are taxed for it, but the charge of it is with the padre, who takes big fees for burials, and lets it go to ruin. The bell has rung long ago, but the people are waiting our return , and the evening duties of distributing food, turning on the night gang for night work, and closing the gates, are performed.</p>
			<p>To-night the hounds have an alarm , and C⁠⸺ is off in the darkness. In a few minutes he returns. There has been some one about, but nothing is discovered . A negro may have attempted to steal out, or some strange negro may be trying to steal in , or some prowling white, or free black, has been reconnoitering. These are the terms on which this system is carried on ; and I think, too, that when the tramp of horses is heard after dark, and strange men ride to wards the piazza, it causes some uneasiness.</p>
			<p>The morning of the fourth day, 1 take my leave, by the early train for Matanzas. The hour is half- past six ; but the habits of rising are so early that it requires no special prepara tion. I have time for coffee, for a last visit to the sugar-bouse, a good -by to the engineer, who will be back on the banks of the Merri mack in May, and for a last look into the quarters, to gather the little group of kneelers for ” la bendicion,” with their ” Buenos dias, Señor.” My horse is ready, the negro has gone with my luggage , and I must take my leave of my newly-made friend. Alone together, we have been more intimate in three days than we should have been in as many weeks in a full household. Adios ! -May the opening of a new home on the old spot, which I hear is awaiting you, be the harbinger of a more cheerful life, and the creation of such fresh ties and interests, that the delightful air of the hill country of Cuba, the dreamy mono tony of the day, the serenity of nights which roof or seem to bring the stars down to yourto raise you half-way to them, and the lux ariance and variety of vegetable and anima. fife, may not be the only satisfactions of exist ence here. A quiet amble over the red earth , to the sta tion , in a thick morning mist, almost cola enough to make an overcoat comfortable ; and, after two hours on the rail, I am again in Matanzas, among close-packed houses, and with views of blue ocean and of ships.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
