<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-22" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">A sale of slaves⁠—Cuban preserves⁠—Breakfast with <abbr>Mr.</abbr>⁠⸺ —⁠The census, and the probable number of slaves, free blacks, Creoles, and whites⁠—Lotteries⁠—Cock-fight⁠—The Lopez expedition.</p>
			</header>
			<p>Tuesday, March 1.- Rise early, and walk to the sea-baths, and take a delightful float and swim. And refreshing it is, after a fever ish night in my hot room, where I did not sleep an hour all night, but heard every quar ter-hour struck, and the boatswain’s whistle of the watchmen and their full cry of the hour and the weather, at every clock-strike. From the bath, I look out over the wall, far to the northeast, in the hope of catching a glimpse of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Cahawba</i>’s smoke. This is the day of her expected arrival. My New York friends and myself feel that we have seen Havana to our satisfaction, and the heat is becoming intense. We are beginning to receive advice against eating fruit after café au lait, or bananas with wine, and in favor of high crowned hats at noon to prevent congestion from heat, and tc avoid fogs in the morning. But there is no <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Cahawba</i> in sight, and I hear only the bray of trumpets and roll of drums from the Morro and Cabaña and Punta, and the clanking march of the chain-gang down the Paseo, and the march of the guard to trumpet and drum.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr>⁠⸺ is punctual at seven, his son with him, and a man in a suit of white linen, who We is the broker employed by <abbr>Mr.</abbr>⁠⸺take a ferry-boat and cross to the Regla; and a few minutes’ walk brings us to a small nail factory, where all the workmen are Coolies. In the back yard of this factory is a line of low buildings, from which the slaves are brought out, to be shown. We had taken up, at the ferry-boat, a small, thin, sharp-faced man, who was the dealer. The slaves are formed in a semicircle, by the dealer and broker. The broker pushed and pulled them about in a coarse, careless manner, worse than the manner of the dealer. I am glad he is not to be their master. <abbr>Mr.</abbr>⁠⸺ spoke kindly to them. They were fully dressed; and no exa mination was made except by the eye; and no exhibitions of strength or agility were required, and none of those offensive examinations of which we read so much. What examination had been made or was to be made by the broker, out of my presence, I do not know. The “lot! consisted of about fifty, of both sexes and of all ages; some being old, and some very young. They were not a valuable lot, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr>⁠⸺ refused to purchase them all. The dealer offered to separate them. <abbr>Mr.</abbr>⁠⸺ selected about half of them, and they were set apart. I watched the countenances of all,-the taken and the left. It was hard to decipher the character of their emotions. A kind of fixed hopelessness marked the faces of some, listlessness that of others, and others seemed anxious or disappointed, but whether because taken or rejected, it was hard to say. When the separation was made, and they knew its purpose, still no complaint was made and no suggestion ventured by the slaves that a tie of nature or affection was broken. I asked <abbr>Mr.</abbr>⁠⸺ if some of them might not be related. He said he should attend to that, as he never separated families. He spoke to each of those he had chosen, separately, and asked if they had parent or child, husband or wife, or brother or sister among those who were rejected. A few pointed out their relations, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr>⁠⸺ took them into his lot. One was an aged mother, one a wife, and another a little daughter. I am satisfied that no separa tions were made in this case, and equally sat isfied that neither the dealer nor the broker would have asked the question.</p>
			<p>I asked <abbr>Mr.</abbr>⁠⸺ on what principle he made his selection, as he did not seem to me always to take the strongest.! On the principle of race,” said he. He told me that these negroes were probably natives of Africa, ( bozales, ) ex cept the youngest, and that the signs of the races were known to all planters. A certain race he named as having always more intelli gence and ambition than any other; as more difficult to manage, but far superior when well managed. All of this race in the company, he took at once, whatever their age or strength. I think the preferred tribe was the Lucumí, but am not certain.</p>
			<p>From this place, I made a short visit to the Almacen de azúcar, in the Regla, the great storehouses of sugar. These are a range of one-story, stone warehouses, so large that a great part of the sugar crop of the island, as 1 <abbr>a.m.</abbr> told, could be stored in them. Here the vessels go to load, and the merchants store ‘ heir sugar here, as wine is stored in the London docks.</p>
			<p>The Cubans are careful of the diet of for eigners, even in winter. I bought a couple of oranges, and young <abbr>Mr.</abbr>⁠⸺ bought a sapote, a kind of sweet- sour apple, when the broker said! Take care! Did you not have milk with your coffee?! I inquired, and they told me it was not well to eat fresh fruit soon after taking milk, or to take bananas with wine, or to drink spirits.! But is this in winter, also?!! Yes; and it is already very hot, and there is danger of fever among strangers.”</p>
			<p>Went to La Dominica, the great restaur ant and depot of preserves and sweetmeats for Havana, and made out my order for preserves to take home with me. After consultation, I am advised to make up my list as follows: guava of Peru, limes, mammey apples, sour sop, cocoa-nut, oranges, guava jelly, guava marmalade, and almonds. The ladies tell me there is a kind of fine inen sold here, called bolan, which it is diffi cult to obtain in the United States, and which would be very proper to take home for a pres ent. On this advice, I bought a quantity of it, of blue and white, at La Diana, a shop on the corner of Calle de Obispo and San Ignacio.</p>
			<p>Breakfasted with a wealthy and intelligent gentleman, a large planter, who is a native of Cuba, but of European descent. A very nice breakfast, of Spanish mixed dishes, rice cooked to perfection, fruits, claret, and the only cup of good black tea I have tasted in Cuba. At Le Grand’s, we have no tea but the green.</p>
			<p>At breakfast, we talked freely on the subject of the condition and prospects of Cuba; and I obtained from my host his views of the eco nomical and industrial situation of the island. He was confident that the number of slaves does not exceed 500,000, to 200,000 free blacks, and 600,000 or 700,000 whites. His argument led him to put the number of slaves as low as he could, yet he estimated it far above that of the census of 1857, which makes it 375,000. But no one regards the census of slaves as correct. There is a tax on slaves, and the government has little chance of get ting them stated at the full number. One planter said to a friend of mine a year or two ago, that his two hundred slaves were returned as one hundred. I find the best opinions put the slaves at 650,000, the free blacks at 200,000, and the whites at 700,000.</p>
			<p>Havana is flooded with lottery-ticket vend ers. They infest every eating-house and pub lic way, and vex you at dinner, in your walks and rides. They sell for one grand lottery, established and guarantied by the government, always in operation, and yielding to the State a net revenue of nearly two millions a year. The Cubans are infatuated with this lottery. All classes seem to embark in it. Its effect is especially bad on the slaves, who invest in it all they can earn, beg, or steal, allured by the glorious vision of possibly purchasing their freedom, and elevating themselves into the class of proprietors.</p>
			<p>Some gentlemen at Le Grand’s have been to a cock-fight. I shall be obliged to leave the island without seeing this national sport for which every town, and every village has a pit, a Valle de Gallos. They tell me it was a very exciting scene among the spectators. Negroes, free and slave, low whites, Coolies, and men of high condition, were all fran tically betting. Most of the bets were made. by holding up the fingers and by other signs, between boxes and galleries. They say I should hardly credit the large sums which the most ordinary looking men staked and paid.</p>
			<p>I am surprised to find what an impression the Lopez expedition made in Cuba⁠—a far greater impression than is commonly supposed in the United States. The fears of the govern ment and hopes of sympathizers exaggerated the force, and the whole military power of the government was stirred against them. Their little force of a few hundred broken -down men and lads, deceived and deserted, fought a body of eight times their number, and kept them at bay, causing great slaughter. The railroad trains brought the wounded into Ha vana, car after car; rumors of defeat filled the city; artillery was sent out; and the actual loss of the Spaniards, in killed and wounded, was surprisingly large. On the front wall of the Cabaña, plainly seen from the deck of every vessel that leaves or enters the port, is a monu ment to the honor of those who fell in the battle with the Filibusteros. The spot where Lopez was garroted, in front of the Punta, is pointed out, as well as the slope of the hill from the castle of Atares, where his surviving followers were shot.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
