<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XVII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-17" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">At Havana⁠—<abbr>Dr.</abbr> Howe⁠—Trial of Señor Maestri⁠—Music of the contradanza.</p>
			</header>
			<p>The warm bath round the corner, is a refreshment after a day’s railroad ride in such heat; and there, in the front room, the man in his shirt sleeves is serving out liquor, as before, and the usual company of Creoles is gathered about the billiard tables. After a dinner in the handsome, airy restaurant of Le Grand’s, I drive into the city in the evening, to the close streets of the Entramuros, and pay a visit to the lady whom I failed to see on my arrival. I am so fortunate as to meet her, and beside the pleas ure to be found in her society, I am glad to be able to give her personal information from her attached and sympathizing friends, at the North.</p>
			<p>While I am there, a tinkling sound of bells is heard in the streets, and lights flash by. It is a procession, going to carry the viaticum, the last sacrament, to a dying person.</p>
			<p>From this house, I drove towards the water side, past the Plaza de Armas, the old Plaza de San Francisco, with its monastery turned into an almazen (a storehouse of merchandise,) through the Calle de los Officios, to the boarding-house of Madame Almy, to call upon <abbr>Dr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Howe. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Parker left Havana, as he intended, last Tuesday, for Santa Cruz. He found Havana rather too hot for his comfort, and Santa Cruz, the most healthful and temperate of the islands, had always been his destination. He had visited a few places in the city, and among others, the College of Belen, where he had been courteously received by the Jesuits. I found that they knew his reputation as a scholar and writer, and a leading champion of modern Theism in America. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Howe had called at Le Grand’s, yesterday, to invite me to go with him to attend a trial, at the Audiencia, which attracted a good deal of interest among the Creoles. The story, as told by the friends of Señor Maestri, the defendant, is, that in the performance of a judicial duty, he dis charged a person against whom the government was proceeding illegally, and that this led to a correspondence between him and the authorities, which resulted in his being deposed and brought to trial, before the Audiencia, on a charge of disrespect to the Captain - General. I have no means of learning the correctness of this statement, at present—</p>
			<p>“I say the tale as ’t was said to me.”</p>
			<p>The cause has, at all events, excited a deep interest among the Creoles, who see in it another proof of the unlimited character of the centralized power that governs them. I regret that I missed a scene of so much interest and instruction. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Howe told me that Maestri’s counsel, Señor Azcárate, a young lawyer, defended his friend courageously; but the evidence being all in writing, without the exciting conflicts and vicissitudes of oral testimony, and the written arguments being delivered sitting, there was not much in the proceedings to stimulate the Creole excitability. No decision was given, the Court taking time to deliberate. It seems to have been a Montalembert trial, on a small theatre.</p>
			<p>To-night there is again a mascara at the next door, but my room is now more remote, and I am able to sleep through it. Once I awoke. It was nearly five o’clock. The music was still going on, but in softer and more subdued tones. The drums and trumpets were hushed, and all had fallen, as if by the magic touch of the approaching dawn, into a trance of sound, a rondo of constantly returning delicious melody, as nearly irresistible to the charmed sense as sound can be conceived to be⁠—just bordering on the fusing state be tween sense and spirit. It is a contradanza of Cuba. The great bells beat five, over the city; and instantly the music ceases, and is heard no more. The watchmen cry the hour and the bells of the hospitals and convents sound their matins though it is vet dark.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
