<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Belen⁠—The Jesuit college, brethren, and pupils⁠—The Order of Jesuits.</p>
			</header>
			<p>Monday, February 2.- Rose before six and walked as usual, down the Paseo, to the sea baths. How refreshing is this bath , after the hot night and close rooms ! At your side, the wide blue sea with its distant sails, the bath cut into the clean rock, the gentle wash ing in and out of the tideless sea, at the Gulf Stream.temperature , in the cool of the morn ing ! As I pass down , I meet a file of Coolies, in Chinese costume, marching, under over seers, to their work or their jail. And there is the chain-gang ! clank, clank, as they go headed by officers with pistols and swords , and flanked by drivers with whips. This is simple wretchedness !</p>
			<p>While at breakfast, a gentleman in th dress of the regular clergy, speaking English called upon me, bringing me, from the bishop an open letter of introduction and admission to all the religious, charitable, and educational institutions of the city, and offering to con duct me to the Belen ( Bethlehem) . He is Father <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> of Charleston , S. C., temporarily in Havana, with whom I find I have some ac quaintances in common, both in America and abroad. We drive together to the Belen. I say drive ; for few persons walk far in Havana, after ten o’clock in the morning. The volantes are the public carriages of Havana ; and are as abundant as cabs in London. You never need stand long at a street door without finding one. The postilions are always ne groes ; and I am told that they pay the owner a certain sum per day for the horse and vo lante, and make what they can above that.</p>
			<p>The Belen is a group of buildings, of the usual yellow or tawny color, covering a good deal of ground, and of a thoroughly monastic character. It was first a Franciscan monas tery, then a barrack, and now has been given by the Government to the Jesuits . The com pany of Jesuits here is composed of a rector and about forty clerical and twenty lay brethren. These perform every office, from the highest scientific investigations and instruction , down to the lowest menial offices, in the care of the children ; some serving in costly vestments at the high altar, and others in coarse black garb at the gates. It is only three years since they established themselves in Havana , but in that time they have formed a school of two hundred boarders and one hundred day scholars , built dormitories for the boarders, and a common hall, restored the church and made it the most fully attended in the city established a missionary work in all parts of the town, recalled a great number to the dis cipline of the Church, and not only created something like an enthusiasm of devotion among the women , who are said to have monopolized the religion of Cuba in times past, but have introduced among the men, and among many influential men, the prac tices of confession and communion, to which they had been almost entirely strangers. I do not take this account from the Jesuits them selves, but from the regular clergy of other orders, and from Protestants who are opposed to thein and their influence. All agree that they are at work with zeal and success.</p>
			<p>I met my distinguished acquaintance of yes terday, the rector, who took me to the boys’ chapel, and introduced me to Father Antonio Cabre, a very young man of a spare frame and intellectual countenance, with hands so white and so thin, and eyes so bright, and cheek so pale ! He is at the head of the de partment of mathematics and astronomy, and looks indeed as if he had outwatched the stars, in vigils of science or of devotion . He took me to his laboratory, his observatory, and his apparatus of philosophic instruments. These I am told are according to the latest inventions, and in the best style of French and German workmanship. I was also shown a collection of coins and medals, a cabinet of shells, the commencement of a museum of natural history, already enriched with most of the birds of Cuba, and an interesting cabinet of the woods of the island, in small blocks , each piece being polished on one side, and rough on the other. Among the woods were the ma noganies, the iron-wood, the ebony, the lignum vitæ, the cedar, and many others, of names unfamiliar to me, which admit of the most ex quisite polish. Some of the most curious were from the Isla de Pinos , an island belonging to Cuba, and on its southern shore.</p>
			<p>The sleeping arrangement for the boys here seemed to me to be new, and to be well adapted to the climate. There is a large hall, with a roof about thirty feet from the floor, and windows near the top, to give light and ventilation above, and small port-holes, near In the ground, to let air into the passages . this ball are double rows of compartments, like high pews, or, more profanely, like the large boxes in restaurants and chop -houses, open at the top, with curtains instead of doors, and each large enough to contain a single bed, a chair, and a toilet table. This ensures both privacy and the light and air of the great hall. The bedsteads are of iron ; and nothing can exceed the neatness and order of the apart ments. The boys’ clothes are kept in another part of the house, and they take to their dormi tories only the clothes that they are using Each boy sleeps alone. Several of the Fathers sleep in the hall, in curtained rooms at the ends of the passage-ways, and a watchman walks the rounds all night, to guard against fire, and to give notice of sickness.</p>
			<p>The boys have a playground , a gymnasium, and a riding-school. But although they like riding and fencing, they do not take to the robust exercises and sports of English school boys. An American whom I met here, who had spent several months at the school, told me that in their recreations they were more like girls, and liked to sit a good deal, play ing or working with their hands. He pointed out to me a boy, the son of an American mother, a lady to whom I brought letters and kind wishes from her many friends at the North, and told me that he had more pluck than any boy in the school.</p>
			<p>The roof of the Belen is flat, and gives a pleasant promenade, in the open air, after the sun is gone down, which is much needed, as the buildings are in the dense part of the city.</p>
			<p>The brethren of this order wear short hair, with the tonsure, and aress in coarse cassocks of plain black, coming to the feet, and but toned close to the neck, with a cape, but with no white of collar above ; and in these, they sweep like black spectres, about the passage ways , and across the halls and court-yards . There are so many of them that they are able to give thorough and minute attention to the boys, not only in instruction, both secular and religious, but in their entire training and de velopment.</p>
			<p>From the scholastic part of the institution, I passed to the church. It is not very large, has an open marble floor, a gallery newly erected for the use of the brethren and other men, a sumptuous high altar, a sacristy and vestry behind , and a small altar, by which burned the undying lamp, indicating the pres ence of the Sacrament. In the vestry, I was shown the vestments for the service of the high altar, some of which are costly and gorgeous in the extreme, not probably exceeded by those of the Temple at Jerusalem in the palmiest days of the Jewish hierarchy. All are presents from wealthy devotees. One, an alb, had a circle of precious stones ; and the lace alone on another, a present from a lady of rank, is said to have cost three thousand dollars . Whatever may be thought of the rightfulness of this ex penditure, turning upon the old question as to which the alabaster box of ointment and the ordained costliness of the Jewish ritual ” must give us pause,” it cannot be said of the Jesuits that they live in cedar, while the ark of God rests in curtains ; for the actual life of the streets hardly presents any greater contrast, than that between the sumptuousness of their apparel at the altar, and the coarseness and cheapness of their ordinary dress, the bareness of their rooms, and the apparent severity of their life.</p>
			<p>The Cubans have a childish taste for exces sive decoration. Their altars look like toy shops . A priest, not a Cuban, told me that he went to the high altar of the cathedral once, on a Christmas day, to officiate, and when his eye fell on the childish and almost profane attempts at symbolism —a kind of doll millinery⁠—if he had not got so far that he could not retire without scandal, he would nave left the duties of the day to others. At the Belen there is less of this ; but the Jesuits find or think it necessary to conform a good deal to the popular taste.</p>
			<p>In the sacristy, near the side altar, is a dis tressing image of the Virgin, not in youth, but the mother of the mature man, with a sword pierced through her heart, -referring to the figurative prediction, “ a sword shall pierce through thine own soul also.” The handle and a part of the blade remain without, while the marks of the deep wound are seen , and the countenance expresses the sorest agony of mind and body. It is painful, and beyond all legitimate scope of art, and haunts one, like a vision of actual misery. It is almost the only thing in the church of which I have brought away a distinct image in my memory.</p>
			<p>A strange, eventful history, is that of the Society of Jesus ! Ignatius Loyola, a soldier and noble of Spain, renouncing arms and knighthood, hangs his trophies of war upon the altar of Monserrate . After intense studies and barefoot pilgrimages, persecuted by relig ious orders whose excesses he sought to re strain, and frowned upon by the Inquisition he organizes, with Xavier and Faber, at Mont martre, a society of three. From this small beginning, spreading upwards and outwards, it overshadows the earth. Now, at the top of success, it is supposed to control half Christen dom . Now, his order proscribed by State and Church alike and suppressed by the Pope him self, there is not a spot of earth in Catholic Christendom where the Jesuit can place the sole of his foot. In this hour of distress, he finds refuge in Russia, and in Protestant Prus sia. Then, restored and tolerated, the order revives here and there in Europe, with a fitful life ; and, at length, blazes out into a glory of missionary triumphs and martyrdoms in China, in India, in Africa , and in North America ; and now, in these later days , we see it ad vancing everywhere to a new epoch of labor and influence. Thorough in education , per fect in discipline, absolute in obedience ,-as yielding, as indestructible , as all-pervading as water or as air !</p>
			<p>The Jesuits make strong friends and strong enemies. Many, who are neither the one nor the other, say of them that their ethics are ar tificial, and their system unnatural ; that they do not reform nature, but destroy it ; that, aim ing to use the world without abusing it, they reduce it to subjection and tutelage ; that they are always either in dangerous power, or in disgrace ; and although they may labor with more enthusiasm and self-consecration thar any other order, and meet with astonishing successes for a time, yet such is the char acter of their system that these successes are never permanent, but result in opposition , not only from Protestants, and moderate Catholics , and from the civil power, but from other relig ious orders and from the regular clergy in their own Church, an opposition to which they are invariably compelled to yield , at last. In fine, they declare, that, allowing them all zeal, and all ability, and all devotedness, their sys tem is too severe and too unnatural for per manent usefulness anywhere,-medicine and not food, lightning and not light, flame and not warmth.</p>
			<p>Not satisfied with this moderated judgment, their opponents have met them, always and everywhere, with uniform and vehement repro. bation. They say to them- the opinion of mankind has condemned you ! The just and irreversible sentence of time has made you a by-word and a hissing, and reduced your very name, the most sacred in its origin, to a syno nyme for ambition and deceit !</p>
			<p>Others, again, esteem them the nearest ap proach in modern times to that type of men portrayed by one of the chiefest, in his epis tle : ” In much patience, in afflictions , in ne cessities, in distresses, in stripes, in imprison ments, in tumults , in labors, in watchings, in fastings ; by pureness, by knowledge, by long suffering ;⁠ ⁠… by honor and dishonor ; by evil report and good report ; as deceivers and yet true ; as unknown, and yet well known ; as dying, and behold we live ; as chastened, and not killed ; as sorrowful, and yet always re joicing ; as poor, yet making many rich ; as having nothing, and yet possessing all things. “</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
