<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">A máscara⁠—Spanish troops⁠—Sunday in Havana⁠—Dinner at the Bishop’s⁠—Interest in the Thirty Millions Bill⁠—Visits at evening.</p>
			</header>
			<p>Tomorrow, I am to go, at eight o’c.ock either to the church of San Domingo, to hear the military mass, or to the Jesuit church of Belen; for the service of my own church is not publicly celebrated, even at the British Consulate; no service but the Roman Catholic being tolerated on the island</p>
			<p>Tonight there is a public máscara ( mask ball) at the great hall, next door to Le Grand’s My only window is by the side of the numerous windows of the great hall, and all these are wide open; and I should be stifled if I were to close mine. The music is loud and violent, from a very large band, with kettle drums and bass drums and trumpets; and be cause these do not make noise and uproar enough, leather bands are snapped, at the turns in the tunes. For sleeping, I might as well have been stretched on the bass drum. This tumult of noises, and the heat are wearing and oppressive beyond endurance, as it draws on past midnight, to the small hours; and the servants in the court of the hall seem to be tending at tables of quarrelling men, and to be interminably washing and breaking dishes. After several feverish hours, I light a match and look at my watch. It is nearly five o’clock in the morning. There is an hour to daylight⁠—and will this noise stop before then? The city clocks struck five; the music ceased; and the bells of the convents and monasteries tolled their matins, to call the nuns and monks to their prayers and to the bedsides of the sick and dying in the hospitals, as the maskers go home from their revels at this hideous hour of Sunday morning. The servants ceased their noises, the cocks began to crow and the bells to chime, the trumpets began to bray, and the cries of the streets broke in before dawn, and I dropped asleep just as I was thinking sleep past hoping for; when I am awaked by a knocking at the door, and Antonio calling,! Usted! Usted! Un caballero quiere ver á Usted!! to find it half-past nine, the middle of the forenoon, and an ecclesiastic in black dress and shovel hat, waiting in the passageway, with a message from the bishop.</p>
			<p>His Excellency regrets not having seen me the day before, and invites me to dinner at three o’clock, to meet three or four gentlemen; an invitation which I accept with pleasure.</p>
			<p>I am too late for the mass, or any other religious service, as all the churches close at ten o’clock. A tepid, soothing bath, at “Los baños públicos,” round the corner, and I spend the morning in my chamber. As we are at break fast, the troops pass by the Paseo, from the mass service. Their gait is quick and easy, with swinging arms, after the French fashion. Their dress is seersucker, with straw hats and red cockades: the regiments being distinguished by the color of the cloth on the cuffs of the coat, some being yellow, some green, and some blue.</p>
			<p>Soon after two o’clock, I take a carriage for the bishop’s. On my way out I see that the streets are full of Spanish sailors from the men of-war, ashore for a holiday, dressed in the style of English sailors, with wide duck trousers, blue jackets, and straw hats, with the name of their ship on the front of the hat. All business is going on as usual, and labor ers are at work in the streets and on the houses.</p>
			<p>The company consists of the bishop him self, the Bishop of Puebla de los Angeles in Mexico, Father Yuch, the rector of the Jesuit College, who has a high reputation as a man of intellect, and two young ecclesiastics. Our dinner is well cooked, and in the Spanish style, consisting of fish, vegetables, fruits, and of stewed light dishes, made up of vegetables, fowls and other meats, a style of cooking well adapted to a climate in which one is very will ing to dispense with the solid, heavy cuts of an English dinner.</p>
			<p>The Bishop of Puebla wore the purple, the Bishop of Havana a black robe with a broad cape, lined with red, and each wore the Epis copal cross and ring. The others were in simple black cassocks. The conversation was in French; for, to my surprise, none of the company could speak English; and being allowed my election between French and Spanish, I chose the former, as the lighter infliction on my associates.</p>
			<p>I am surprised to see what an impression is made on all classes in this country by the pending! Thirty Millions Bill! of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Slidell. It is known to be an Administration measure, and is thought to be the first step in a series which is to end in an attempt to seize the is land. Our steamer brought oral intelligence that it had passed the Senate, and it was so announced in the Diario of the day after our arrival, although no newspaper that we brought 80 stated it. Not only with these clergymen, but with the merchants and others whom I have met since our arrival, foreigners as well as Cubans, this is the absorbing topic. Their future seems to be hanging in doubt, de pending on the action of our government, which is thought to have a settled purpose to acquire the island. I suggested that it had not passed the Senate, and would not pass the House; and, at most, was only an authority to the President to make an offer that would certainly be refused. But they looked beyond the form of the act, and regarded it as the first move in a plan, of which, although they could not entirely know the details, they thought they understood the motive.</p>
			<p>These clergymen were well informed as to the state of religion in the United States, the relative numbers and force of the various de nominations, and their doctrinal differences; the reputations of Brownson, Parker, Beecher, and others; and most minutely acquainted with the condition of their own church in the Uni ted States, and with the chief of its clergy. This acquaintance is not attributable solely to their unity of organization, and to the con sequent interchange of communication, but largely also to the tie of a common education at the Propaganda or <abbr>St.</abbr> Sulpice, the catalogues of whose alumni are familiar to the educated Catholic clergy throughout the world.</p>
			<p>The subject of slavery, and the condition and prospects of the Negro race in Cuba, the probable results of the Coolie system, and the elations between Church and State in Cuba, and the manner in which Sunday is treated in Havana, the public school system in Amer ica, the fate of Mormonism, and how our government will treat it, were freely discussed It is not because I have any reason to suppose that these gentlemen would object to all they said being printed in these pages, and read by all who may choose to read it in Cuba, or the United States, that I do not report their interesting and instructive conversation; but because it would be, in my opinion, a violation of the universal understanding among gentlemen.</p>
			<p>After dinner, we walked on the piazza, with the noble sunset view of the unsurpassed panorama lying before us; and I took my leave of my host, a kind and courteous gentleman of Old Spain, as well as a prelate, just as a few lights were beginning to sprinkle over the fading city, and the Morro Light to gleam on the untroubled air.</p>
			<p>Made two visits in the city this evening. In each house, I found the double row of chairs, facing each other, always with about four or five feet of space between the rows. The etiquette is that the gentlemen sit on the row opposite to the ladies, if there be bu two or three present. If a lady, on entering go to the side of a gentleman, when the other row is open to her, it indicates either familiar acquaintance or boldness. There is no people so observant of outguards, as the Spanish race.</p>
			<p>I notice, and my observation is supported by what I am told by the residents here, that there is no street-walking, in the technical sense, in Havana. Whether this is from the fact that no ladies walk in the streets⁠—which are too narrow for comfortable or even safe walking⁠—or by reason of police regulations, I do not know. From what one meets with in the streets, if he does not look farther, one would not know that there was a vice in Havana, not even drunkenness.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
