<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-21" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Habits of the Cubans, beckoning, smoking, &amp;c.⁠—Visit to the Bishop, at Jesus del Monte⁠—Coolie mart, in the Cerro⁠—The condition and prospects of the Coolies; their importation, contracts, and treatment.</p>
			</header>
			<p>The people of Cuba have a mode of calling attention by a sound of the tongue and lips, a sort of ” P-s-t ! ” after the fashion of some parts of the continent of Europe. It is uni versal here ; and is used not only to servants and children, but between themselves, and to trangers. It has a mean sound, to us. They make it clear and penetrating ; yet it seems a poor, effeminate sibilation, and no generous, open-mouthed call. It is the mode of stop ping a volante, calling a waiter, attracting the attention of a friend, or calling the notice of a stranger. I have no doubt, if a fire were to break out at the next door, a Cuban would call ” P- s- t ! “</p>
			<p>They beckon a person to come to them by the reverse of our motion . They raise the open hand, with the palm outwards, bending the fingers toward the person they are calling. We should interpret it to be a sign to gc away.</p>
			<p>Smoking is universal, and all but constant. I have amused myself, in the street, by seeing what proportion of those I meet have cigars or cigarettos in their mouths. Sometimes it has been one half, sometimes one in three. The cigar is a great leveller. Any man may stop another for a light. I have seen the poor por ters , on the wharf, bow to gentlemen , stran gers to them, and hold out a cigar, and the gentlemen stop, give a light, and go on⁠—all as of course.</p>
			<p>In the evening, called on the Señoritas F⁠⸺, at the house of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> B⁠⸺ and on the American young lady at Señor M-‘ s , and on <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Howe, at Mde. Almy’s, to offer to take letters or packets.</p>
			<p>At <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Almy’s, there is a gentleman from New York, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> G⁠⸺, who is dying of con sumption. His only wish is to live until the Cahawba comes in , that he may at least die at sea, if he cannot survive until she reaches New York. He has a horror of dying here, and be ing buried in the Potter’s Field.- <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Howe has just come from his chamber.</p>
			<p>I drove out to the bishop’s, to pay my part ing respects. It is about half- past eight in the evening. He has just returned from his even ing drive, is dressed in a cool, cambric dressing gown, after a bath, and is taking a quiet cigar in his high-roofed parlor. He is very cordial and polite, and talks again about the Thirty Millions Bill , and asks what I think of the result, and what I have seen of the island, and my opinion of the religious and charitable institutions. I praise the Belen and the Sis ters of Charity, and condemn the prison, and he appears to agree with me. He appreciates the learning and zeal of the Brothers of Belen ; speaks in the highest terms of the devotedness of the Sisters of Charity ; and admits the great faults of the prison , but says it was built recently, at an enormous outlay, and he supposes the government is reluctant to be at the expense of abandoning it and building another. He charges me with messages of remembrance and respect to acquaintances we have in common . As I take my leave, he goes with me to the outer gate, which is kept locked, and again takes leave, for two leave takings are the custom of the country, and returns to the solitude of his house.</p>
			<p>Yesterday I drove out to the Cerro, to see the Coolie jail, or market, where the imported Coolies are kept for sale. It is a well-known place, and open to all visitors. The building has a fair-looking front ; and through this I enter, past two porters, into an open yard in the rear, where, on the gravel ground , are squatting a double line of Coolies, with heads shaved, except a tuft on the crown, dressed in loose Chinese garments of blue and yellow. The dealer, who is a calm, shrewd, heartless looking man, speaking English as well as if it were his native tongue , comes out with me, calls to the Coolies, and they all stand up in a double line, facing inward, and we pass through them, preceded by a driver armed with the usual badge of the plantation driver, the short, limber whip. The dealer does not hesitate to tell me the terms on which the contracts are made, as the trade is not illegal. His account is this-The importer receives $340 for each Coolie, and the purchaser agrees to pay the Coolie four dollars per month, and to give him food, and two suits of clothes a year. For this, he has his ser vices for eight years . The contract is reduced to writing before a magistrate, and two orig inals are made, one kept by the Coolie and one by the purchaser, and each in Chinese and Spanish .</p>
			<p>This was a strange and striking exhibition of power. Two or three white men, bringing hundreds of Chinese thousands of miles , to a new climate and people, holding them prison ers, selling their services to masters having an unknown tongue and an unknown religion, to work at unknown trades, for inscrutable pur poses !</p>
			<p>The Coolies did not look unhealthy, though some had complaints of the eyes ; yet they looked, or I fancied they looked⁠—some of them , unhappy, and some of them stolid. One I am sure had the leprosy ; although the dealer would not admit it. The dealer did not deny their tendency to suicide, and the anger of attempting to chastise them , but alleged their great superiority to the negro in intelligence, and contended that their condi tion was good, and better than in China, hav ing four dollars a month , and being free at the end of eight years . He said, which I found to be true, that after being separated and employed in work, they let their hair grow, and adopt the habits and dress of the coun try. The newly arrived Coolies wear tufts, and blue-and-yellow, loose, Chinese clothes. Those who have been here long are distin guishable from the whites only by the pecu liar tinge of the cheek, and the form of the eye.</p>
			<p>The only respect in which his account dif fered from what I heard elsewhere, was in the amount the importer receives, which has al ways been stated to me at $400 .</p>
			<p>While I am talking with him , a gentle man comes and passes down the line. He is probably a purchaser , I judge ; and I leave my informant to follow what is more for his inter est than talking with me.</p>
			<p>The importation has not yet existed eight years. So the question, what will become of these men , exotics , without women or children, taking no root in the land , has not come to a solution. The constant question is⁠—will they remain and mix with the other races ? Will they be permitted to remain ? Will they be able to go back ?</p>
			<p>So far as I can learn , there is no law in China regulating the contracts and shipment of Chinese Coolies, and none in Cuba regulat ing their transportation, landing, or treatment while here. The trade has grown up and been permitted and recognized , but not regulated. It is yet to be determined how far the contract is enforceable against either party. Those Coolies that are taken from the British East Indies to British islands, are taken under contracts, with regulations , as to their expor tation and return , understood and enforced. Not so the Chinese Coolies. Their importers are lege soluti. Some say the government will insist on their being returned. But the pre vailing impression is that they will be brought in debt, and bound over again for their debts or in some other way secured to a life-long servitude, <abbr>Mr.</abbr>⁠⸺, a very wealthy and intelligent planter, tells me he is to go over to Regla, to morrow morning, to see a lot of slaves offered for sale to him, and asks me if I have ever seen a sale of slaves. I never have seen that sight, and accept his invitation. We are to leave here at half-past six, or seven, at the ‘ atest. All work is early here ; I believe I nave mentioned that the hour of ‘ Change for merchants is 7.30 A. M.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
