<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-13" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Trees and flowers⁠—Chameleon⁠—Fruits⁠—Red ant⁠—Meals and routine of life on plantation⁠—Penitentiary, lying-in room, etc.⁠—Señor Bourgoise⁠—Third day at La Ariadne⁠—Effects of foreign education on planters.</p>
			</header>
			<p>When I came out from my chamber this morning, the elder <abbr>Mr.</abbr> C⁠⸺⁠had gone. The watchful Negress brought me coffee, and I could choose between oranges and bananas, for my fruit. The young master had been in the saddle an hour or so. I sauntered to the sugar house. It was past six, and all hands were at work again, amid the perpetual boiling of the cauldrons, the skimming and dipping and stirring, the cries of the cauldron-men to the firemen, the slow gait of the wagons, and the perpetual to-and-fro of the carriers of the cane. The engine is doing well enough, and the engineer has the great sheet of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">New York Weekly Herald</i>, which he is studying, in the intervals of labor, as he sits on the corner of the brickwork.</p>
			<p>But a turn in the garden is more agreeable, among birds, and flowers, and aromatic trees. Here is a mignonette tree, forty feet high, and every part is full and fragrant with flowers, as is the little mignonette in our flowerpots. There is the allspice, a large tree, each leaf strong enough to flavor a dish. Here is the tamarind tree: I must sit under it, for the sake of the old song. My young friend joins me, and points out, on the allspice tree, a chameleon. It is about six inches long, and of a pea-green color. He thinks its changes of color, which are no fable, depend on the will or on the sensations, and not on the color of the object the animal rests upon. This one, though on a black trunk, remained pale green. When they take the color of the tree they rest on, it may be to elude their enemies, to whom their slow motions make them an easy prey. At the corner of the house stands a pomegranate tree, full of fruit, which is not yet entirely ripe; but we find enough to give a fair taste of its rich flavor. Then there are sweet oranges, and sour oranges, and limes and coconuts, and pineapples, the latter not entirely ripe, but in the condition in which they are usually plucked for our market, and abundance of fuschias, and Cape jasmines, and the highly prized night-blooming cereus.</p>
			<p>The most frequent shade tree here is the mango. It is a large, dense tree, with a general resemblance, in form and size, to our lime or linden. Three noble trees stand before the door, in front of the house. One is a Tahiti almond, another a mango, and the third a cedar. And in the distance is a majestic tree, of incredible size, which is, I believe, a ceiba. When this estate was a cafetal, the house stood at the junction of four avenues, from the four points of the compass: one of the sweet orange, one of the sour orange, one of palms, and one of mangoes. Many of these trees fell in the hurricanes of 1843 and ’45. The avenue which leads from the road, and part of that leading towards the sugar house, are preserved. The rest have fallen a sacrifice to the sugarcane; but the garden, the trees about the house, and what remains of the avenues, give still a delightful appearance of shelter and repose.</p>
			<p>I have amused myself by tracing the progress, and learning the habits of the red ants, a pretty formidable enemy to all structures of wood. They eat into the heart of the hardest woods; not even the lignum vitæ, or iron wood, or cedar, being proof against them. Their operations are secret. They never appear upon the wood, or touch its outer shell. A beam or rafter stands as ever with a goodly outside; but you tap it, and find it a shell. Their approaches, too, are by covered ways. When going from one piece of wood to another, they construct a covered way, very small and low, as a protection against their numerous enemies, and through this they advance to their new labors. I think that they may sap the strength of a whole roof of rafters, without the observer being able to see one of them, unless he breaks their covered ways, or lays open the wood.</p>
			<p>The course of life at the plantation is after this manner. At six o’clock, the great bell begins the day, and the Negroes go to their work. The house servants bring coffee to the family and guests, as they appear or send for it. The master’s horse is at the door, under the tree, as soon as it is light, and he is off on his tour, before the sun rises. The family breakfasts at ten o’clock, and the people⁠—la gente, as the technical phrase is for the laborers, break fast at nine. The breakfast is like that of the cities, with the exception of fish and the variety of meats, and consists of rice, eggs, fried plantains, mixed dishes of vegetables and fowls, other meats rarely, and fruits, with claret or Catalonia and coffee. The time for the siesta or rest, is between breakfast and dinner. Dinner hour is three for the family, and two for the people. The dinner does not differ much from the breakfast, except that there is less of fruit and more of meat, and that some preserve is usually eaten, as a dessert. Like the breakfast, it ends with coffee. In all manner of preserves, the island is rich. The almond, the guava, the cocoa, the soursop, the orange, the lime, and the mamey ap ple, afford a great variety. After dinner, and before dark, is the time for long drives; and, when the families are on the estates, for visits to neighbors. There is no third meal; but coffee, and sometimes tea, is offered at night The usual time for bed is as early as ten o’clock, for the day begins early, and the chief outdoor works and active recreations must be had before breakfast.</p>
			<p>In addition to the family house, the Negro quarters, and the sugar house, there is a range of stone buildings, ending with a kitchen, occupied by the engineer, the <i xml:lang="es">mayoral</i>, the <i xml:lang="es">boyero</i>, and the mayordomo, who have an old Negro woman to cook for them, and another to wait on them. There is also another row of stone buildings, comprising the storehouse, the penitentiary, the hospital, and the lying-in room. The penitentiary, I have described. The hospital and lying-in room are airy, well ventilated, and suitable for their purposes. Neither of them had any tenants today. In the centre of the group of buildings, is a high frame, on which hangs the great bell of the plantation. This rings the Negroes up in the morning, and in at night, and sounds the hours for meals. It calls all in, on any special occasion, and is used for an alarm to the neighboring plantations, rung long and loud, in case of fire in the cane fields, or other occasions for calling in aid.</p>
			<p>After dinner, today, a volante, with two horses, and a postilion in bright jacket and buckled boots and large silver spurs, the harness well-besprinkled with silver, drove to the door, and an elderly gentleman alighted and came to the house, attired with scrupulous nicety of white cravat and dress coat, and with the manners of the <i>ancien régime</i>. This is <abbr>M.</abbr> Bourgeoise, the owner of the neighboring large plantation, Santa Catalina, one of the few cafetals remaining in this part of the island. He is too old, and too much attached to his plantation, to change it to a sugar estate; and he is too rich to need the change. He, too, was a refugee from the insurrection of <abbr>St.</abbr> Domingo, but older than <abbr>M.</abbr> C⁠⸺. Not being able to escape, he was compelled to serve as aid decamp to Jacques Dessalines. He has a good deal to say about the insurrection and its results, of a great part of which he was an eye witness. The sight of him brought vividly to mind the high career and sad fate of the just and brave Toussaint L’Ouverture, and the brilliant successes, and fickle, cruel rule, of Dessalines⁠—when French marshals were outmanoeuvred by Negro generals, and pitched battles were won by Negroes and mulattoes against European armies.</p>
			<p>This gentleman had driven over in the hope of seeing his friend and neighbor, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> C⁠⸺ the elder. He remained with us for some time, sitting under the veranda, the silvered volante and its black horses and black postilion standing under the trees. He invited us to visit his plantation, which I was desirous to do, as a cafetal is a rarity now.</p>
			<p>My third day at La Ariadne, is much like the preceding days: the early rising, the coffee and fruit, the walk, visits to the mill, the fields, the garden, and the quarters, breakfast, rest indoors with reading and writing, dinner, out of doors again, and the evening under the veranda, with conversations on subjects now so interesting to me. These conversations, and what I had learned from other persons, open to me new causes for interest and sympathy with my younger host. Born in South Carolina, he has secured his rights of birth, and is a citizen of the United States, though all his pecuniary interests and family affections are in Cuba. He went to Paris at the age of nine, and remained there until he was nineteen, devoting the ten years to thorough courses of study in the best schools. He has spent much time in Boston, and has been at sea, to China, India, and the Pacific and California⁠—was wrecked in the Boston ship Mary Ellen, on a coral reef in the India seas, taken captive, restored, and brought back to Boston in another ship, whence he sailed for California. There he had a long and checkered experience, was wounded in the battle with the Indians who killed <abbr>Lieut.</abbr> Dale and defeated his party, was engaged in scientific surveys, topographical and geological, took the fever of the South Coast at a remote place, was reported dead, and came to his mother’s door, at the spot where we are talking this evening, so weak and sunken that his brothers did not know him, thinking it happiness enough if he could reach his home, to die in his mother’s arms. But home and its cherishings, and revived moral force, restored him, and now, active and strong again, when, in consequence of the marriage of his brothers and sisters, and the departure of neighbors, the family leave their home of thirty-five years for the city, he becomes the acting master, the <i xml:lang="es">administrador</i> of the estate, and makes the old house his bachelor’s hall.</p>
			<p>An education in Europe or the United States must tend to free the youth of Cuba from the besetting fault of untravelled plantation masters. They are in no danger of thinking their plantations and Cuba the world, or any great part of it. In such cases, I should think the danger might be rather the other way⁠—rather that of disgust and discouragement at the narrowness of the field, the entire want of a career set before them⁠—a career of any kind, literary, scientific, political, or military. The choice is between expatriation, and contentment in the position of a secluded cultivator of sugar by slave labor, with occasional opportunities of intercourse with the world and of foreign travel, with no other field than the limits of the plantation afford, for the exercise of the scientific knowledge, so laboriously acquired, and with no more exciting motive for the continuance of intellectual culture than the general sense of its worth and fitness.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
